
BSMS2001
Diploma Level Course
Business Data Management
A significant source of data sets and problems for data scientists will come from the business domain. This course provides a basic understanding of how businesses are organised and run from a data perspective.
by
Dr. G Venkatesh
,
Prof. Suresh Babu
,
Dr. Milind Gandhe
Course ID: BSMS2001
Course Credits: 4
Course Type: Data Science
Pre-requisites:
                            
                                None
What you’ll learn
VIEW COURSE VIDEOS
Understand the business context: consumption patterns, micro-economic concepts underlying demand and supply
Analyse firm-level and industry-level data
Discover how businesses operate, and how they are actively managed using data dashboards
Get a handle on the data that originates from business processes
Identify the techniques used to represent and structure this data
Gain skills on the use of worksheets to organise, interpret and present data
Working with large data sets
Course structure & Assessments
12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit
Academics
page.
WEEK 1
Consumption and demand: Micro & Macro economics: the role of data,  production, consumption and exchange, consumption baskets, sources of consumer survey data
WEEK 2
Micro-economic concepts: Utility: cardinal vs ordinal, indifference curves. Demand and supply curves, changes in demand and elasticity. production cost, cost curves. Make vs buy decisions, production quantity decisions
WEEK 3
Firm level strategies and performance data: Objectives and types of pricing strategies, analysis of firm performance - key ratios. Analysis examples: Ultratech, Page Industries, Nestle, TCS
WEEK 4
Analysing industry level data: Industry definition and classification codes, IIP and PMI, industry market structure and concentration indices, competitive positioning in an industry - Porter's five forces. Analysis examples:  Cement industry, Textile industry, FMCG industry, IT industry
WEEK 5
Case study 1 - Fabmart (E-Commerce): Introduction to E-Commerce, Fabmart case introduction, explanation of data set & questions to be answered, revenue pareto, volume pareto, scatter plot of sales and revenue, revenue trend
WEEK 6
Fabmart case continued: Sales analysis, organisation of distribution centre, analysis of sales trends, average days of inventory, ledger, avoiding stockouts
WEEK 7
Case study 2 - Ace Gears (Manufacturing):  Introduction to the manufacturing sector, context of the automotive industry during the years 2019-2021, explanation of data set containing monthly information on sales, production, inventory and costing. Revenue trend analysis, portfolio management
WEEK 8
Ace Gears case study continued: 
Regional sales analysis, sales agent planning, production scheduling, scrap analysis, unit level profitability analysis, raw material re-ordering and safety stock
WEEK 9
Case study 3 - Tech Enterprises (IT): Introduction to HR as a function, Introduction to the Tech Enterprises, internal sourcing, ranking of internal candidates, job description, sourcing channels and their analysis, recruitment process and onboarding
WEEK 10
Case study 4 - PayBuddy (Fin Tech): Introduction to Finance Industry and Fintech, payment processing and money flow, new credit product introduction, nudge economics, payment transaction and customer data set, identifying rules to target the appropriate customers
WEEK 11
Paybuddy case continued: Introduction to A/B testing, analysis of the  A/B testing data, credit risk evaluation, risk-return tradeoffs
WEEK 12
Discussion on student acquired data sets. Wrap upaWrap up (summary) of the case studies, course project work
+ Show all weeks
About the Instructors
Dr. G Venkatesh
Professor of Practice,
                            
                             
                                Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
                            
                            
                            IIT Madras
Dr. Venkatesh is a Professor of Practice at IIT Madras, where he is involved with several projects in the field of education. He is also a Fellow and Director of Sasken Communication Technologies Ltd, a leading Indian R&D services provider, and a founder of Mylspot, an education technology startup that aims to bridge knowledge gaps of students through a mentored learning platform.
...
more
Dr Venkatesh is a graduate in electronics from IIT Madras, PhD in Computer Science from TIFR, Mumbai and was a faculty member of the Computer Science & Engineering Dept of IIT Bombay for 8 years where his research interests revolved around declarative languages and their application to the design of embedded systems. He moved to the industry when Sasken was being formed, where he led their technology activities for over two decades. He was a visiting/adjunct faculty at IIM Bangalore for 10 years and a Chair Professor in the department of EE at IIT Madras for 3 years.
Dr. Venkatesh was elected as a fellow of the Indian National Academy of Engineers in 2006 and the IETE in 2012. He won the Technomentor award of the Indian Electronics and Semiconductor Association in 2013 and the Vasvik award for industrial research in 2015. Dr. Venkatesh serves on a number of government, industry and investor committees and boards in the areas of microelectronics, telecommunications and education.
