
BSCS2002
Diploma Level Course
Programming, Data Structures and Algorithms using Python
A good foundation course to introduce basic concepts in the design and analysis of algorithms as well as standard data structures, using Python as a base language for implementing these.
by
Madhavan Mukund
Course ID: BSCS2002
Course Credits: 4
Course Type: Programming
Pre-requisites:
                            
                                None
What you’ll learn
VIEW COURSE VIDEOS
Evaluating asymptotic upper bounds for algorithms using big O notation
Using standard data structures such as lists, arrays, stacks, queues, heaps
Comparing algorithms for sorting and searching
Representing, manipulating and analysing graphs
Mastering algorithm design techniques such as divide and conquer and dynamic programming
Applying linear programming and network flows to model computational problems.
Course structure & Assessments
12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit
Academics
page.
WEEK 1
Python Refresher
WEEK 2
Complexity, Notations, Sorting and Searching Algorithms
WEEK 3
Arrays, Lists, Stacks, Queues, Hashing
WEEK 4
Graph Algorithms
WEEK 5
Graph Algorithms (Continued)
WEEK 6
Union-Find Data Structure, Priority Queue, Heap, Binary Search Tree
WEEK 7
Balanced Search Tree, Greedy Algorithms
WEEK 8
Divide and Conquer
WEEK 9
Dynamic Programming
WEEK 10
String or Pattern Matching Algorithms
WEEK 11
Network Flows, Linear Programming, Class of Algorithms
WEEK 12
Summary
+ Show all weeks
About the Instructors
Madhavan Mukund
Director,
                            
                            
                            
                            Chennai Mathematical Institute
Madhavan Mukund studied at IIT Bombay (BTech) and Aarhus University (PhD). He has been a faculty member at Chennai Mathematical Institute since 1992.His main research area is formal verification. He has active research collaborations within and outside India and serves on international conference programme committees and editorial boards of journals.
...
more
He has served as President of both the Indian Association for Research in Computing Science (IARCS) (2011-2017) and the ACM India Council (2016-2018). He has been the National Coordinator of the Indian Computing Olympiad since 2002. He served as the Executive Director of the International Olympiad in Informatics from 2011-2014.
In addition to the NPTEL MOOC programme, he has been involved in organizing IARCS Instructional Courses for college teachers. He is a member of ACM India's Education Committee. He has contributed lectures on algorithms to the Massively Empowered Classroom (MEC) project of Microsoft Research and the QEEE programme of MHRD.
