
BSCS2001
Diploma Level Course
Database Management Systems
A comprehensive introduction to databases, database management, and relevant topics like database security, integrity, concurrency, and data warehousing.
by
Prof. Partha Pratim Das
Course ID: BSCS2001
Course Credits: 4
Course Type: Programming
Pre-requisites:
                            
                                None
Course structure & Assessments
12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit
Academics
page.
WEEK 1
Course Overview
WEEK 2
Relational Model and Basic SQL
WEEK 3
Intermediate and Advanced SQL
WEEK 4
Relational Query Languages and Database Design
WEEK 5
Functional Dependency and Normal Forms
WEEK 6
Functional Dependency and Normal Forms (cont.)
WEEK 7
Application Development
WEEK 8
Storage Management
WEEK 9
Indexing and Hashing
WEEK 10
Transactions
WEEK 11
Backup and Recovery
WEEK 12
Query Optimization and Conclusion
+ Show all weeks
Prescribed Books
The following are the suggested books for the course:
Database Management Systems - Abraham Silberschatz , Henry F. Korth, S. Sudarshan
About the Instructors
Prof. Partha Pratim Das
Professor,
                            
                             
                                Computer Science and Engineering,
                            
                            
                            IIT Kharagpur
Dr. Das obtained his B Tech, M Tech and Ph D degrees in1984, 1985 and 1988 respectively from IIT Kharagpur. He served as a faculty member in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kharagpur from 1988 to 1998. In 1998, he moved to the Industry and served in Senior Director positions. In 2011, Dr. Das joined back the Department as a Professor. He is the Joint PI of National Digital Library of India project of MoE and leads the national initiative to integrate the digital learning contents.
...
more
Dr. Das is a regular contributor to the SWAYAM Program and his courses on Programming in C++, Object Oriented Analysis and Design, and Data Base Management Systems have been attended by thousands of students since 2017. Over the last decade he has been teaching Compilers, Software Engineering, Image Processing, Foundations of Algorithms & Machine Learning, and Principles of Programming Languages for which he received top students’ feedback 6 times during 2014 to 2018. Dr. Das has published over 50 papers in international journals in his interest areas spanning Computer Vision, Digital Learning, Digital Geometry, Human-Computer Interaction, Medical Image Analysis, Computer Analysis of Indian Classical Dance, and Productivity in Software Engineering.
