
BSCS2004
Diploma Level Course
Machine Learning Foundations
This course lays the groundwork for the upcoming ML courses by covering various fundamentals that do not necessarily fall under Machine Learning but are quite necessary for a comprehensive understanding of Machine Learning.
by
Harish Guruprasad Ramaswamy
,
Arun Rajkumar
,
Prashanth LA
Course ID: BSCS2004
Course Credits: 4
Course Type: Data Science
Pre-requisites:
                            
                                None
What you’ll learn
VIEW COURSE VIDEOS
Recognising if a particular problem can be viewed as a Machine Learning problem.
Breaking down standard Machine Learning problems into more fundamental problems using tools from Calculus, Linear Algebra, Probability and Optimisation.
Recognising relationships between equation solving, projection onto a subspace, and the supervised learning problem of linear least squares regression.
Visualising eigenvalue/eigenvectors as a property of a matrix, and recognising its potential in practical unsupervised learning problems like dimensionality reduction and image compression.
Using, identifying failure modes, programming and debugging simple gradient descent methods for solving unconstrained optimisation problems.
Recognising the value of simple models like Gaussian mixture models for data, constructing algorithms for learning the parameters of such models, and interpreting these parameters.
Course structure & Assessments
12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit
Academics
page.
WEEK 1
Introduction to machine learning
WEEK 2
Calculus
WEEK 3
Linear Algebra - Least Squares Regression
WEEK 4
Linear Algebra - Eigenvalues and eigenvectors
WEEK 5
Linear Algebra - Symmetric matrices
WEEK 6
Linear Algebra - Singular value decomposition, Principal Component Analysis in Image Processing
WEEK 7
Unconstrained Optimisation
WEEK 8
Convex sets, functions, and optimisation problems
WEEK 9
Constrained Optimisation and Lagrange Multipliers. Logistic regression as an optimization problem
WEEK 10
Examples of probabilistic models in machine learning problems
WEEK 11
Exponential Family of distributions
WEEK 12
Parameter estimation. Expectation Maximization.
+ Show all weeks
About the Instructors
Harish Guruprasad Ramaswamy
Assistant Professor,
                            
                             
                                Department of Computer Sciences & Engineering,
                            
                            
                            IIT Madras
I am currently an assistant professor at the computer science and engineering (CSE) department of IIT Madras. My primary areas of interest are in machine learning, statistical learning theory and optimisation. I was previously a research scientist at IBM research labs and a post-doc at University of Michigan. I completed my PhD at the Computer Science and Automation (CSA) department of the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore advised by Prof. Shivani Agarwal. I have been fortunate to work with Profs. Ambuj Tewari and Clayton Scott during my PhD and postdoc. Earlier, I finished my M.E. under the supervision of Prof. Chiranjib Bhattacharyya.
less
Visit website
Arun Rajkumar
Assistant Professor,
                            
                             
                                Department of Data Science and AI,
                            
                            
                            IIT Madras
I am currently an Assistant Professor at the Data Science and AI department of IIT Madras. Prior to joining IIT Madras, I was a research scientist at the Xerox Research Center (now Conduent Labs), Bangalore for three years. I earned my Ph.D from the Indian Institute of Science where I worked on 'Ranking from Pairwise Comparisons'. My research interests are in the areas of Machine learning, statistical learning theory with applications to education and healthcare.
less
