
BSCS2005
Diploma Level Course
Programming Concepts using Java
This course uses Java to provide an understanding of core ideas in object oriented programming, exception handling, event driven programming, concurrent programming and functional programming.
by
Madhavan Mukund
Course ID: BSCS2005
Course Credits: 4
Course Type: Programming
Pre-requisites:
                            
                                None
What you’ll learn
VIEW COURSE VIDEOS
Creating simple object-oriented programs in Java
Understanding encapsulation, separating interface from implementation
Implementing abstraction through a hierarchy of classes and objects
Dealing gracefully with errors and exceptions
Controlling concurrent access to data through locks, semaphores and monitors
Course structure & Assessments
12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
                For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit
Academics
page.
WEEK 1
Basic Object Oriented Programming: Class Hierarchy
WEEK 2
Basic Object Oriented Programming: Inheritance, Overriding
WEEK 3
Basic Object Oriented Programming: Polymorphism
WEEK 4
Basic Object Oriented Programming: Abstract Classes
WEEK 5
Collections. Iterators.
WEEK 6
Generics. Callbacks.
WEEK 7
Cloning. I/O serializations. Packages
WEEK 8
Cloning. I/O serializations. Packages (Continued)
WEEK 9
Exception handling
WEEK 10
Concurrent programming
WEEK 11
Concurrent programming (Continued)
WEEK 12
Concurrent programming (Continued)
+ Show all weeks
About the Instructors
Madhavan Mukund
Director,
                            
                            
                            
                            Chennai Mathematical Institute
Madhavan Mukund studied at IIT Bombay (BTech) and Aarhus University (PhD). He has been a faculty member at Chennai Mathematical Institute since 1992.His main research area is formal verification. He has active research collaborations within and outside India and serves on international conference programme committees and editorial boards of journals.
...
more
He has served as President of both the Indian Association for Research in Computing Science (IARCS) (2011-2017) and the ACM India Council (2016-2018). He has been the National Coordinator of the Indian Computing Olympiad since 2002. He served as the Executive Director of the International Olympiad in Informatics from 2011-2014.
In addition to the NPTEL MOOC programme, he has been involved in organizing IARCS Instructional Courses for college teachers. He is a member of ACM India's Education Committee. He has contributed lectures on algorithms to the Massively Empowered Classroom (MEC) project of Microsoft Research and the QEEE programme of MHRD.

