
BSMA1002
Foundational Level Course
Statistics for Data Science I
The students will be introduced to large datasets. Using this data, the students will be introduced to various insights one can glean from the data. Basic concepts of probability also will be introduced during the course leading to a discussion on Random variables.
by
Usha Mohan
Course ID: BSMA1002
Course Credits: 4
Course Type: Foundational
Pre-requisites:
 None
What you’ll learn
VIEW COURSE VIDEOS
Create, download, manipulate, and analyse data sets.
Frame questions that can be answered from data in terms of variables and cases.
Describe data using numerical summaries and visual representations.
Estimate chance by applying laws of probability.
Translate real-world problems into probability models.
Calculating expectation and variance of a random variable.
Describe and apply the properties of the Binomial Distribution and Normal distribution.
Course structure & Assessments
12 weeks of coursework, weekly online assignments, 2 in-person invigilated quizzes, 1 in-person invigilated end term exam.
 For details of standard course structure and assessments, visit
Academics
page.
WEEK 1
Introduction and type of data, Types of data, Descriptive and Inferential
statistics, Scales of measurement
WEEK 2
Describing categorical data
Frequency distribution of
categorical data, Best practices for
graphing categorical data, Mode and median for
categorical variable
WEEK 3
Describing numerical data
Frequency tables for numerical data, Measures of central tendency - Mean, median and mode, Quartiles and percentiles, Measures of dispersion - Range, variance, standard deviation and IQR, Five number summary
WEEK 4
Association between two variables - 
Association between two categorical variables - Using relative frequencies in contingency tables, Association between two numerical variables - Scatterplot, covariance, Pearson correlation coefficient, Point bi-serial correlation coefficient
WEEK 5
Basic principles of counting and factorial concepts - 
Addition rule of counting, Multiplication rule of
counting, Factorials
WEEK 6
Permutations and combinations
WEEK 7
Probability
Basic definitions of
probability, Events, Properties of probability
WEEK 8
Conditional probability - 
Multiplication rule, Independence, Law of total probability, Bayes’ theorem
WEEK 9
Random Variables - 
Random experiment, sample space and random variable, Discrete and continuous random variable, Probability mass function, Cumulative density function
WEEK 10
Expectation and Variance -
Expectation of a discrete random variable, Variance and standard deviation of a discrete random variable
WEEK 11
Binomial and poisson random variables  - 
Bernoulli trials, Independent and identically distributed random variable, Binomial random variable, Expectation and variance of abinomial random variable, Poisson distribution
WEEK 12
Introduction to continous random variables - 
Area under the curve, Properties of pdf, Uniform distribution, Exponential distribution
+ Show all weeks
Reference Documents / Books
Descriptive Statistics (VOL 1)
DOWNLOAD
Probability and Probability Distributions (VOL 2)
DOWNLOAD
Prescribed Books
The following are the suggested books for the course:
Introductory Statistics (10th Edition) - ISBN 9780321989178, by Neil A. Weiss published by Pearson
Introductory Statistics (4th Edition) - by Sheldon M. Ross
About the Instructors
Usha Mohan
Professor,
 Department of Management Studies,
 IIT Madras
Usha Mohan holds a Ph.D. from Indian Statistical Institute. She has worked as a researcher in ISB Hyderabad and Lecturer at University of Hyderabad prior to joining IIT Madras. She offers courses in Data analytics, Operations research, and Supply chain management to under graduate, post graduate and doctoral students. In addition, she conducts training in Optimization methods and Data Analytics for industry professionals. Her research interests include developing quantitative models in operations management and combinatorial optimization.
less
Visit website
